## Annex B

(informative)

## Hazard analysis and risk assessment

## B.1 General

This annex gives a general explanation of the hazard analysis and risk assessment. The examples in B.2 (severity), B.3 (probability of exposure) and B.4 (controllability) are for information only and are not exhaustive.

For this analytical approach, a risk ( R )  can be described as a function ( F ),  having three parameters: The frequency of occurrence ( f ) of a hazardous event, the controllability (C), i.e. the ability to avoid the specific harm or damage through timely reactions of the persons involved, and the potential severity ( S ) of the resulting harm or damage:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  frequency  of  occurrence f is,  in  turn,  influenced  by  two  factors.  One  factor  to  consider  is  how frequently  and  for  how  long  individuals  find  themselves  in  a  situation  where  the  aforementioned hazardous event can occur. In ISO 26262 this is simplified to be a measure of the probability of the operational  situation  taking  place  in  which  the  hazardous  event  can  occur  (exposure, E ).  Another factor is the occurrence rate of faults in the item. This is not considered during hazard analysis and risk assessment. Instead, the ASILs that result from the classification of E, S, C during hazard analysis and risk assessment determine the minimum set of requirements on the item in order to control or reduce the probability of random hardware failures and to avoid systematic faults. The failure rate of the item is  not  considered a priori (in the risk assessment) because an unreasonable residual risk is avoided through the implementation of the resulting safety requirements.

The hazard analysis and risk assessment sub-phase comprises three steps, as described below.

- a) Situation  analysis  and  hazard  identification  (see 6.4.2 ):  the  goal  of  the  situation  analysis  and hazard identification is to identify the potential unintended behaviours of the item that could lead to  a  hazardous  event.  The  situation  analysis  and  hazard  identification  activity  requires  a  clear definition  of  the  item,  its  functionality  and  its  boundaries.  It  is  based  on  the  item's  behaviour; therefore, the detailed design of the item does not necessarily need to be known.

EXAMPLE Factors to be considered for situation analysis and hazard identification can include:

- -vehicle usage scenarios, for example high speed driving, urban driving, parking, off-road;
- -environmental conditions, for example road surface friction, side winds;
- -reasonably foreseeable driver use and misuse;
- -interaction between operational systems; and
- -T&amp;B base vehicle, vehicle configuration and vehicle operation.
- b) Classification  of  hazardous  events  (see 6.4.3 ):  the  hazard  classification  scheme  comprises  the determination of the severity, the probability of exposure, and the controllability associated with the hazardous events of the item. The severity represents an estimate of the potential harm in a particular driving situation, while the probability of exposure is determined by the corresponding situation. The controllability rates how easy or difficult it is for the driver or other road traffic participant to avoid the considered accident type in the considered operational situation. For each

hazard, depending on the number of related hazardous events, the classification will result in one or more combinations of severity, probability of exposure, and controllability.

- c) ASIL determination (see 6.4.3 ): determining the required automotive safety integrity level.

## B.2 Examples of severity

## B.2.1 General

The potential injuries that result from a hazard are evaluated for the driver, passengers and people around the vehicle, or in surrounding vehicles to determine the severity class for a given hazard. From this evaluation, the corresponding severity class is then determined, for example, as shown in Table B.1.

Table B.1 presents examples of consequences which can occur for a given hazard, and the corresponding severity class for each consequence.

Given the complexity of accidents and the many possible variations of accident situations, the examples provided  in  Table  B.1 represent  only  an  approximate  estimate  of  accident  effects.  They  represent expected values based on previous accident analyses. Therefore, no generally valid conclusions can be derived from these individual descriptions.

Accident statistics can be used to determine the distribution of injuries that can be expected to occur in different types of accidents.

In Table B.1 , AIS represents a categorisation of injury classes, but only for single injuries. Instead of AIS, other categorisations such as Maximum AIS (MAIS) and Injury Severity Score (ISS) can be used.

The use of a specific injury scale depends on the state of medical research at the time the analysis is performed. Therefore, the appropriateness of the different injury scales, such as AIS, ISS, and NISS, can vary over time (see References [ 3 ],[ 5 ],[ 6 ]).

## B.2.2 Description of the AIS stages

To describe the severity, the AIS classification is used. The AIS represents a classification of the severity of injuries and is issued by the Association for the Advancement of Automotive Medicine (AAAM). The guidelines were created to enable an international comparison of severity. The scale is divided into seven classes:

- -  AIS 0: no injuries;
- -  AIS 1: light injuries such as skin-deep wounds, muscle pains, whiplash, etc.;
- -  AIS  2:  moderate  injuries  such  as  deep  flesh  wounds,  concussion  with  up  to  15  minutes  of unconsciousness, uncomplicated long bone fractures, uncomplicated rib fractures, etc.;
- -  AIS 3: severe but not life-threatening injuries such as skull fractures without brain injury, spinal dislocations below the fourth cervical vertebra without damage to the spinal cord, more than one fractured rib without paradoxical breathing, etc.;
- -  AIS 4: severe injuries (life-threatening, survival probable) such as concussion with or without skull fractures with up to 12 hours of unconsciousness, paradoxical breathing;
- -  AIS  5:  critical  injuries  (life-threatening,  survival  uncertain)  such  as  spinal  fractures  below  the fourth cervical vertebra with damage to the spinal cord, intestinal tears, cardiac tears, more than 12 hours of unconsciousness including intracranial bleeding;
- -  AIS 6: extremely critical or fatal injuries such as fractures of the cervical vertebrae above the third cervical vertebra with damage to the spinal cord, extremely critical open wounds of body cavities (thoracic and abdominal cavities), etc.

Table	B.1	-	Examples	of	severity	classification

|                                                | Class of severity (see Table 1)                                                                                                                                                                 | Class of severity (see Table 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Class of severity (see Table 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Class of severity (see Table 1)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                | S0                                                                                                                                                                                              | S1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | S2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | S3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Description                                    | No injuries                                                                                                                                                                                     | Light and moderate injuries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Severe and life-threatening injuries (survival probable)                                                                                                                                                                                        | Life-threatening inju- ries (survival uncer- tain), fatal injuries                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Reference for single injuries (from AIS scale) | AIS 0 and less than 10 % probability of AIS 1-6; or damage that cannot be classified safety-related                                                                                             | More than 10 %prob- ability of AIS 1-6 (and not S2 or S3)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | More than 10 % probability of AIS 3-6 (and not S3)                                                                                                                                                                                              | More than 10 %prob- ability of AIS 5-6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Examples                                       | - Bumps with roadside infrastructure - Pushing over roadside post, fence, etc. - Light grazing damage - Damage entering/ exiting parking space - Leaving the road without collision or rollover | - Side impact with a narrow stationary object, e.g. passenger car crashing into a tree (impact to passenger cell) with very low speed - Rear/front collision with another passenger car with very low speed - Front collision (e.g. rear-ending another vehicle, semi-trailer, etc.) without passenger compartment deformation | - Side impact with a narrow stationary object, e.g. passenger car crashing into a tree (impact to passenger cell) with low speed - Rear/front collision with another passenger car with low speed - Pedestrian/ bicycle accident with low speed | - Side impact with a narrow stationary object, e.g. passenger car crashing into a tree (impact to passenger cell) with medium speed - Rear/front collision with another vehicle with medium speed - Front collision (e.g. rear-ending another vehicle, semi-trailer, etc.) with passenger compartment deformation |

NOTE   The informative examples in Table B.1 can be applied to passenger cars and T&amp;B, but are considered on a case by case basis.

## B.3 Examples and explanations of the probability of exposure

An  estimation  of  the  probability  of  exposure  requires  the  evaluation  of  the  scenarios  in  which  the relevant  environmental  factors  that  contribute  to  the  occurrence  of  the  hazard  are  present.  The scenarios to be evaluated include a wide range of driving or operating situations.

These  evaluations  result  in  the  designation  of  the  hazard  scenarios  into  one  of  five  probability  of exposure classifications, given the nomenclature E0 (lowest exposure level), E1, E2, E3 and E4 (highest exposure level).

The first of these, E0, is assigned to situations which, although identified during a hazard analysis and risk  assessment,  are  considered  to  be  unusual  or  incredible.  Subsequent  evaluation  of  the  hazards associated exclusively with these E0 scenarios may be excluded from further analysis.

EXAMPLE 1 Typical examples of E0 include the following:

- a) a very unusual, or infeasible, co-occurrence of circumstances, e.g. a vehicle involved in an incident which includes an aeroplane landing on a highway; and
- b) natural disasters, e.g. earthquake, hurricane, forest fire.

The remaining E1, E2, E3 and E4 levels are assigned for situations that can become hazardous depending on either the duration of a situation (temporal overlap) or the frequency of occurrence of a situation.

NOTE 1 The classification can depend on, for example, geographical location or type of use (see 6.4.3.5).

The exposure (E) to a hazard can be estimated in two ways. The first is based on the duration of a situation and the second is based on the frequency in which a situation is encountered. For example, a  hazard  can  be  related  to  the  duration  of  a  given  operational  situation  e.g.  the  average  time  spent negotiating  traffic  intersections,  while  another  hazard  can  be  related  to  the  frequency  of  the  same operational situation e.g. the rate of repetition with which a vehicle negotiates traffic intersections.

In the first case where the exposure is ranked based on the duration of a situation, the probability of exposure is typically estimated by the proportion of time spent in the considered situation compared to  the  total  operating  time  e.g.  ignition  on.  Note  that  in  some  cases  the  total  operating  time  can  be the vehicle life-time (including ignition off). In the second case, it is more appropriate that exposure estimates are determined using the frequency of occurrence of a related driving situation. An example where this is appropriate is where a pre-existing E/E system fault leads to the hazardous event within a short interval after the situation occurs.

Examples  of  driving  situations  classified  by  duration  and  typical  exposure  rankings  are  given  in Tables B.2 and B.4 and examples of driving situations classified by frequency are given in Table B.3 and Table B.5.

In addition to these driving situations, the specific context of that operating situation is considered. This is necessary in order to determine the actual exposure in terms of exact time and exact location that leads to the hazardous event.

EXAMPLE 2 A child lock failure by itself does not necessarily lead to a hazardous event unless the child is old enough to unfasten the seatbelt and leave the car into traffic while another car is approaching in that very moment.

A driving situation may have both duration and a frequency, such as driving in a parking lot. In this case, the examples in Tables B.2/B.4 and Tables B.3/B.5 might not lead to the same exposure category, so the most appropriate exposure ranking is selected for the analysis of the considered operational situation.

If the time period in which a failure remains latent is comparable to the time period before the hazardous event can be expected to take place, then the estimation of the probability of exposure considers that time period. Typically this will concern devices that are expected to act on demand, e.g. airbags.

In this case, the probability of exposure is estimated by σ × T where σ is the rate of occurrence of the operational situation and T is the duration during which the failure is not perceived (possibly up to the lifetime of the vehicle). This approximation σ × T is valid when this resulting product is small.

NOTE 2 With regard to the duration of the considered failure, the hazard analysis and risk assessment does not consider safety mechanisms that are part of the item (see 6.4.1.2).

Table B.2 - Classes of probability of exposure regarding duration in operational situations

|                                        | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                        | E1                                                                         | E2                                                                         | E3                                                                         | E4                                                                         |
| Description                            | Very low probability                                                       | Low probability                                                            | Medium probability                                                         | High probability                                                           |
| Duration (% of average operating time) | Not specified                                                              | <1 %of average oper- ating time                                            | 1 %to 10 %of aver- age operating time                                      | >10 %of average operating time                                             |
| Examples for road layout               | -                                                                          | - Country road intersection - Highway exit ramp                            | - One-way street (city street)                                             | - Highway - Country road                                                   |

## Table B.2 (continued)

|                                       | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)                |
|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                       | E1                                                                         | E2                                                                         | E2                                                                         | E3                                                                         | E4                                                                                      |
| Examples for road surface             | -                                                                          | - -                                                                        | Snow and ice on road Slippery leaves on road                               | - Wet road                                                                 | -                                                                                       |
| Examples for vehicle stationary state | - Vehicle during jump start - In repair garage                             | - - -                                                                      | Trailer attached Roof rack attached Vehicle being refuelled                | - Vehicle on a hill (hill hold)                                            | -                                                                                       |
| Examples for manoeuvre                | - Driving downhill with engine off (mountain pass)                         | - - -                                                                      | Driving in reverse Overtaking Parking (with trailer attached)              | - Heavy traffic (stop and go)                                              | Accelerating Decelerating Stopping at traffic light (city street) Lane change (highway) |

## Table B.3 - Classes of probability of exposure regarding frequency in operational situations

|                                       | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)        | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)                            |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                       | E1                                                                              | E2                                                                         | E3                                                                         | E4                                                                                                  |
| Description                           | Very low probability                                                            | Low probability                                                            | Medium probability                                                         | High probability                                                                                    |
| Frequency of situation                | Occurs less often than once a year for the great majority of drivers            | Occurs a few times a year for the great majority of drivers                | Occurs once a month or more often for an average driver                    | Occurs during almost every drive on average                                                         |
| Examples for road layout              | -                                                                               | - Mountain pass with unsecured steep slope                                 | -                                                                          | -                                                                                                   |
| Examples for road surface             | -                                                                               | - Snow and ice on road                                                     | - Wet road                                                                 | -                                                                                                   |
| Examples for vehicle stationary state | - Stopped, requiring engine restart (at railway crossing) - Vehicle being towed | - Roof rack attached                                                       | - Vehicle being refuelled - Vehicle on a hill (hill hold)                  | -                                                                                                   |
| Examples for manoeuvre                | -                                                                               | - Evasive manoeuvre, deviating from desired path                           | - Overtaking                                                               | - Shifting transmission gears - Executing a turn (steering) - Using indicators - Driving in reverse |

## ISO 26262-3:2018(E)

Table B.4 and B.5 provide examples for T&amp;B. Different types of base vehicles are considered in the tables:

- -  long haul (LH), for long distance transporting goods;
- -  distribution (DI), for distributing goods;
- -  vocational (VO), for performing specific work functions, e.g. dumper truck, concrete mixer, dustcart;
- -  city bus (CB), for urban and suburban use;
- -  interurban bus (IB), for interurban transport; and
- -  coach (CO), for long distance journeys.

Table B.4 - Classes of probability of exposure regarding duration in operational situations for T&amp;B

|                                        |                                                                                                                                        | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   |
|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                        |                                                                                                                                        | E1                                                                         | E2                                                                         | E3                                                                         |
| Description                            | Description                                                                                                                            | Very low probability                                                       | Low proba- bility                                                          | Medium probability                                                         |
| Duration (% of average operating time) | Duration (% of average operating time)                                                                                                 | Not specified                                                              | <1 %of average operating time                                              | 1 %to 10 % of average operating time                                       |
|                                        | driving in reverse                                                                                                                     | -                                                                          | LH, CB, CO, IB                                                             | DI, VO                                                                     |
|                                        | overtaking another truck or bus with small speed difference (with lane change to oncoming lane)                                        | LH, DI, VO, CO, IB                                                         | -                                                                          | -                                                                          |
|                                        | driving with trailer attached                                                                                                          | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | DI, CO, IB                                                                 |
|                                        | semi-trailer tractor without trailer attached (on public road)                                                                         | -                                                                          | LH, DI, VO                                                                 | -                                                                          |
|                                        | driving on construction site (vehicle is driving directly on construction site, not only for delivering goods to construc - tion site) | LH                                                                         | DI                                                                         | -                                                                          |
|                                        | steep slope                                                                                                                            | LH, CB                                                                     | DI, CO, IB                                                                 | VO                                                                         |
|                                        | standing at a bus stop                                                                                                                 | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | CO                                                                         |
|                                        | entering/driving off from bus stop                                                                                                     | -                                                                          | CO                                                                         | CB, IB                                                                     |

NOTE   The informative examples in Table  B.2 can  be  applied  to  T&amp;B,  but  are  considered  on  a  case  by  case  basis.  For situations occurring in both, Table B.2 and Table B.4 Table B.4 is considered more appropriate for T&amp;B. ,

Table B.5 - Classes of probability of exposure regarding frequency in operational situations for T&amp;B

|                                                                                                                                        | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   | Class of probability of exposure in operational situations (see Table 2)   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                        | E1                                                                         | E2                                                                         | E3                                                                         | E4                                                                         |
| Description                                                                                                                            | Very low probability                                                       | Low proba- bility                                                          | Medium probability                                                         | High proba- bility                                                         |
| Frequency of situation                                                                                                                 | Occurs less often than once a year for the great majority of drivers       | Occurs a few times a year for the great majority of drivers                | Occurs once a month or more often for an aver- age driver                  | Occurs dur- ing almost every drive on average                              |
| driving in reverse                                                                                                                     | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | CB                                                                         | LH, DI, VO, CO, IB                                                         |
| overtaking another truck or bus with small speed difference (with lane change to oncoming lane)                                        | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | LH, DI, VO, CO, IB                                                         | -                                                                          |
| driving with trailer attached                                                                                                          | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | DI, CO, IB                                                                 | LH, VO                                                                     |
| semi-trailer tractor without trailer attached (on public road)                                                                         | -                                                                          | DI, VO                                                                     | LH                                                                         | -                                                                          |
| driving on construction site (vehicle is driving directly on construction site, not only for delivering goods to construc - tion site) | LH                                                                         | DI                                                                         | -                                                                          | VO                                                                         |
| steep slope                                                                                                                            | LH, CB                                                                     | DI, CO, IB                                                                 | -                                                                          | VO                                                                         |
| standing at/entering/driving off a bus stop                                                                                            | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | -                                                                          | CB, CO, IB                                                                 |

NOTE   The informative examples in Table  B.3 can  be  applied  to  T&amp;B,  but  are  considered  on  a  case  by  case  basis.  For situations occurring in both Table B.3 and Table B.5 Table B.5 is considered more appropriate for T&amp;B. ,

## B.4 Examples of controllability

To  determine  the  controllability  class  for  a  given  hazard  an  estimation  of  the  probability  that  the representative driver or other persons involved can influence the situation in order to avoid harm is made.

This probability estimation involves the consideration of the likelihood that representative drivers will be able to retain or regain control of the vehicle if the hazard were to occur, or that individuals in the vicinity will contribute to the avoidance of the hazard by their actions. This consideration is based on assumptions about the control actions, necessary by the individuals involved in the hazard scenario, to retain or regain control of the situation, as well as the representative driving behaviour of the drivers involved.

NOTE 1 Controllability estimations can be influenced by a number of factors including driver profiles for the target market, individuals' age, eye-hand coordination, driving experience, cultural background, etc.).

NOTE 2 Estimates can be made using either experimental or analytical procedures.

To aid in these evaluations, Table B.6 provides examples of driving situations in which a malfunction is introduced, and the assumptions about the corresponding control behaviours that would avoid harm. These situations are mapped to the controllability rankings, clarifying the 90 % and 99 % breakpoint levels for judging controllability.

Table B.6 - Examples of possibly controllable hazardous events by the driver or by the persons potentially at risk

|                                                                                                                            | Class of controllability (see Table 3)   | Class of controllability (see Table 3)                                                       | Class of controllability (see Table 3)                                                             | Class of controllability (see Table 3)                                                       |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                            | C0                                       | C1                                                                                           | C2                                                                                                 | C3                                                                                           |
| Description                                                                                                                | Controllable in general                  | Simply controllable                                                                          | Normally control - lable                                                                           | Difficult to control or uncontrollable                                                       |
| Driving factors and sce- narios                                                                                            | Controllable in general                  | More than 99 %of the average drivers or other traffic par - ticipants are able to avoid harm | Between 90 % an 99 %of the average drivers or other traffic par - ticipants are able to avoid harm | Less than 90 %of the average drivers or other traffic par - ticipants are able to avoid harm |
| Example situations that are considered distract- ing e.g. unexpected radio volume increase or warn- ing message - fuel low | Maintain intended driving path           | -                                                                                            | -                                                                                                  | -                                                                                            |
| Example for unavailabil - ity of a driver assisting system that does not affect the safe operation of the vehicle          | Maintain intended driving path           | -                                                                                            | -                                                                                                  | -                                                                                            |
| Example for unintended closing of window while driving                                                                     | -                                        | Remove arm from window                                                                       | -                                                                                                  | -                                                                                            |
| Example for blocked steering column when ac- celerating from standstill                                                    | -                                        | Brake to slow/stop vehicle                                                                   | -                                                                                                  | -                                                                                            |
| Example for failure of ABS during emergency braking                                                                        | -                                        | -                                                                                            | Maintain intended driving path                                                                     |                                                                                              |
| Example for propulsion failure at high lateral acceleration                                                                | -                                        | -                                                                                            | Maintain intended driving path                                                                     | -                                                                                            |
| Example for inadvertent opening bus door while driving with passenger standing in doorway                                  | -                                        | -                                                                                            | Passenger grabs hand rail to avoid falling out of bus                                              | -                                                                                            |
| Example for failure of brakes                                                                                              | -                                        | -                                                                                            | -                                                                                                  | Steer away from objects in driving path                                                      |

NOTE 1   For C2, a feasible test scenario in accordance with RESPONSE 3 (see Reference  [ 4 ])  is  accepted  as  adequate: 'Practical testing experience revealed that a number of 20 valid data sets per scenario can supply a basic indication of validity'. If each of the 20 data sets complies with the pass-criteria for the test, a level of controllability of 85 % (with a level of confidence of 95 % which is generally accepted for human factors tests) can be proven. This is appropriate evidence of the rationale for a C2-estimate.

NOTE 2   For C1 a test to provide a rationale that 99 % of the drivers 'pass' the test in a certain traffic scenario might not be feasible because a large number of test subjects would be necessary as the appropriate evidence for such a rationale. Decision can be based on expert judgement.

NOTE 3   As no controllability is assumed for category C3, it is not relevant to have appropriate evidence of the rationale for such a classification.

NOTE 4   The informative examples in Table B.6 can be applied to passenger cars and T&amp;B vehicles, but are considered on a case-by-case basis.

## Table B.6 (continued)

|                                                                             | Class of controllability (see Table 3)   | Class of controllability (see Table 3)   | Class of controllability (see Table 3)   | Class of controllability (see Table 3)                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                             | C0                                       | C1                                       | C2                                       | C3                                                                                   |
| Description                                                                 | Controllable in general                  | Simply controllable                      | Normally control - lable                 | Difficult to control or uncontrollable                                               |
| Example for faulty driver airbag release when trav- elling at high speed    | -                                        | -                                        | -                                        | Maintain intended driving path, stay in lane, or brake to slow/stop vehicle          |
| Example for excessive trailer swing during braking potential for jacknifing | -                                        | -                                        | -                                        | Driver coun- ter-steers and brakes in an at- tempt to maintain intended driving path |
| Example for function with high automation where driver is not in the loop   | -                                        | -                                        | -                                        | No attempt to maintain intended driving path                                         |

NOTE 1   For C2, a feasible test scenario in accordance with RESPONSE 3 (see Reference  [ 4 ])  is  accepted  as  adequate: 'Practical testing experience revealed that a number of 20 valid data sets per scenario can supply a basic indication of validity'. If each of the 20 data sets complies with the pass-criteria for the test, a level of controllability of 85 % (with a level of confidence of 95 % which is generally accepted for human factors tests) can be proven. This is appropriate evidence of the rationale for a C2-estimate.

NOTE 2   For C1 a test to provide a rationale that 99 % of the drivers 'pass' the test in a certain traffic scenario might not be feasible because a large number of test subjects would be necessary as the appropriate evidence for such a rationale. Decision can be based on expert judgement.

NOTE 3   As no controllability is assumed for category C3, it is not relevant to have appropriate evidence of the rationale for such a classification.

NOTE 4   The informative examples in Table B.6 can be applied to passenger cars and T&amp;B vehicles, but are considered on a case-by-case basis.